You have embraced a perilous pact with infernal power, binding a living demon’s skin to your own. As your bond deepens, you gain supernatural defenses along with elemental resistances and a fearsome gaze.

Hit Die: d4.
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 2 + Intelligence modifier.
Bonus Feats: The epic Acolyte of the Skin gains a bonus feat every four levels.

Special:
Spells: The epic acolyte's caster level increases by 1 every even-numbered level gained above 10th. In addition, at every even-numbered level, the epic acolyte of the skin gains new spells per day as if he had also gained a level in whatever spellcasting class he belonged to before he added the prestige class, up to the number of spells per day possessed by a 20th-level character of that class.
Physical Power (Ex): At 11th level, and every 10 levels thereafter, the epic acolyte of the skin gains a permanent +2 bonus to Strength or Constitution (character's choice).
Poison Immunity (Ex): The epic acolyte of the skin becomes immune to poison at 11th level.
Fiendish Heritage (Sp): At 13th level, and every 4 levels thereafter (17th, 21st, and so on), the acolyte of the skin gains one daily use of each of the following powers: desecrate, unholy blight, and blasphemy. Use the character's acolyte of the skin level as the caster level.
Acid Resistant (Ex): At 14th level, the fiendish skin grants acid resistance 20.
Improved Symbiosis: At 15th level, and every 5 levels thereafter, the enhancement bonus needed to bypass the damage reduction of the epic acolyte of the skin increases by +1 (to DR 20/+2 at 15th level, DR 20/+3 at 20th level, and so forth).
Mental Power (Ex): At 16th level, and every 10 levels thereafter, the epic acolyte of the skin gains a permanent +2 bonus to Intelligence or Charisma (character's choice).
Electricity Resistant (Ex): At 18th level, the fiendish skin grants electricity resistance 20.
Telepathy (Su): A 19th-level acolyte of the skin can communicate telepathically with any creature within 100 feet that has a language. 

Epic Acolyte of the Skin Bonus Feat List:
Arcane Defense, Armor Skin, Blinding Speed, Combat Casting, Energy Resistance, Epic Prowess, Epic Spell Focus, Epic Spell Penetration, Epic Toughness, Greater Spell Focus, Improved Combat Casting, Spell Focus, Spell Penetration, Toughness