
The Unofficial Official Errata

One of the more notorious flaws of the Tome of Battle is that the
official errata by Wizards of the Coast contains about three entries
that are actually about the Tome of Battle. About midway through the
third entry it looks as though someone copied and pasted over what was
there with the Complete Mage errata. The official word is that this will
never be fixed since Wizards ended support for 3.5 errata with the
release of D&D 4th edition.

However, fans of the Tome of Battle rallied together and compiled a
listing of questions and answers from Wizard's Customer Service. This is
as close as it gets to an official errata for the Tome of Battle.

The link to that thread is here. <http://community.wizards.com/go/
thread/view/75882/19525942/Tome_of_Battle_Q38;A?pg=1>

I'm duplicating the questions and answers recored in that thread here,
on the off chance that the thread is ever deleted or lost.

*General Tome of Battle Questions*

*Q:* Dear Sage
Can a martial adept (Tome of Battle) initiate a maneuver or change a
stance while grappling? While pinned?
—Alan

*A:* The grapple rules provide a list of actions available to a
grappling character, but it’s obviously not an exhaustive list. (It
doesn’t, for example, mention “speaking” as an option.) It’s really
intended more as a description of how grappling alters many normal
actions available to characters (such as attacking and moving). Thus,
the DM must apply a bit of his own common sense when adjudicating any
grapple situation.

Any maneuver that involves an attack may be used while grappling, as
long as it’s made with an unarmed strike, natural weapon, or light
weapon against another character you are grappling (PHB p156).

It’s easiest to rule that other maneuvers and stances can be initiated
normally while grappling unless something intrinsic to the maneuver
indicates otherwise. (For example, a maneuver that requires movement
can’t normally be initiated while in a grapple because the grappling
character can’t move freely.) Many maneuvers and stances are designed
for use by grappling characters, and it seems counterintuitive to
restrict those options. A grappling character is somewhat limited in his
physical mobility, but to prevent him from initiating a maneuver or
stance seems unreasonably limiting.

The Sage strongly recommends that a pinned character not be allowed to
initiate a maneuver or stance. The rules clearly state that “to initiate
a maneuver or stance, you must be able to move” (ToB p38), which
suggests that a pinned character shouldn’t be able to accomplish this.

*Q:* When it comes to initiator levels, do you round down or up when you
have half initiator levels, such as when you multiclass into other classes?
*A:* You round down, to a minimum of initiator level 1st.

*Martial Adept Questions*

General Questions

*Q:* How do you calculate initiator level if you have multiple martial
adept classes (from Tome of Battle) and/or prestige classes?
*A:* Calculating initiator level for multiclass characters or characters
with prestige classes can be a little tricky. Basically, you calculate
the initiator level of each martial adept class separately. Your
initiator level for a specific martial adept class is your level in that
class + 1/2 your levels in all other classes. A 10th-level
swordsage/5th-level warblade would have an initiator level of 12th for
all swordsage maneuvers and for determining the maximum maneuver level
that this character could learn as a swordsage. The same character would
have an initiator level of 10th for determining the same effects of his
warblade levels.
Prestige classes are generally treated just like multiclassing, adding
1/2 the level unless the prestige class specifically states otherwise,
as do most of the prestige classes found in Tome of Battle.

*Q:* If you are a multiclass martial adept (from Tome of Battle), a
swordsage/warblade for example, do you have to keep your maneuvers known
and maneuvers readied separate for each class?
*A:* If a character has multiple martial adept base classes, the
maneuvers known and readied from each class are kept separate. Knowing a
maneuver for one class does not mean you can ready it for the other, or
vice versa.

*Q:* If you have levels in two different martial adept classes (from
Tome of Battle), such as swordsage and warblade for example, can you use
maneuvers that you have for one class to meet the prereqs for a maneuver
in your other class?
*A:* If a maneuver has a prerequisite that requires you to have a
certain number of maneuvers from a certain martial discipline, then it
only matters if you have that many maneuvers of that discipline. It does
not matter if the maneuvers all belong to the same class.
For example, a swordsage 3/warblade 2 has a single Diamond Mind maneuver
from the swordsage class. When this character takes a 3rd level of
warblade, they gain another maneuver known and can choose Emerald Razor,
using the Diamond Mind maneuver known from the Swordsage levels to qualify.

*Q:* The maneuvers known description of the crusader, swordsage, and
warblade (in the Tome of Battle) state that you can learn a maneuver in
place of one that you already know. However, these descriptions are
unclear about whether you can learn a maneuver in place of one that you
learned through another class. Can you swap maneuvers gained through
different classes?
To clarify this with an example, can a crusader 4/warblade 3 who has
taken an additional level in the warblade class and learned a maneuver
as a result 'forget' a maneuver that he learned through his crusader
levels and learn a warblade maneuver in place of that maneuver?
*A:* Yes, these abilities do not care what the origin of the replaced
maneuver is.

*Q:* Can my warblade delay acquiring his stance so that he can gain a
2nd-level stance at a later level?
*A:* No, because you can't delay acquiring class features.

Crusader Questions

*Q:* Dear Sage,
If a crusader (Tome of Battle, p.8) has damage reduction, does that
apply before or after damage goes into my steely resolve damage pool?
—Fetch
*A:* Apply damage reduction or any other effect that would reduce the
incoming damage before it goes into the damage pool.
If your DR reduces the incoming damage to 0, no damage goes into your
damage pool.

*Q:* Dear Sage,
If my crusader (Tome of Battle, p.8) receives more healing from an
effect that he needs to return to maximum hit points, do I have to apply
the remainder to my damage pool?
—Antheric
*A:* No.
You can split the amount of incoming healing between your hit points and
damage pool however you wish. You can even apply more healing than you
actually need to either category.
For example, imagine if you had 26 points of damage and 10 points in
your damage pool, and the cleric cast cure critical wounds to restore 28
hit points. Since reducing your damage pool by even a point would lessen
your furious counterstrike bonus, you could apply all 28 points of
healing to your hit points, even though 2 points of that healing is wasted.

*Q:* Dear Sage,
Could a crusader (Tome of Battle, p.8) choose to learn or ready fewer
maneuvers than he or she would be entitled to?
—Joe & Sam
*A:* No.
You must learn and ready the full number of maneuvers entitled to you by
your level.
Otherwise, you’d be able to cycle through your favorites faster, which
defeats the purpose of the crusader’s unique recharge mechanic.

*Q:* Dear Sage,
Can a crusader (Tome of Battle, p.8) delay learning a new stance to a
later level? If not, how can he ever learn an 8th- or 9th-level stance,
since his last stance is gained at only 14th level?
—Horst
*A:* As a general rule, you can’t ever delay gaining any feature that
comes from reaching a new level, whether that’s a feat, skill points,
class feature, or anything else.
The crusader’s stances are no different; at 14th level, the crusader
must select a new stance of 7th level or less.
However, at 15th level the crusader could select the Martial Stance feat
(p.31) in order to choose an 8th-level stance. At 18th level, he could
use that feat to choose a 9th-level stance.

*Q:* Dear Sage,
When a crusader's maneuver recovery mechanic (Tome of Battle, p.9)
activates, what happens to any maneuvers he still had ready and granted?
--Dan
*A:* If at the end of the crusader’s turn he cannot be granted a
maneuver because he has no withheld maneuvers remaining, the process
starts over from scratch. All maneuvers (whether expended or not) once
again become withheld, and two of those maneuvers are randomly granted.
*Q:* Dear Sage,
As part of his discipline focus class feature, the swordsage (Tome of
Battle p16) gains the benefit of the Weapon Focus feat for a set of
weapons. Does he also gain proficiency in the listed weapons?
—Daniel
*A:* According to a strict reading of the rules, no. A swordsage who
wants to avoid the non-proficiency penalty for such weapons must gain
proficiency in those weapons normally.

*Q:* Dear Sage
If a crusader (Tome of Battle) of a good-aligned deity were to "fall"
and become a blackguard, would he gain blackguard powers in a manner
analogous to a fallen paladin who becomes a blackguard?
—Mark
*A:* That falls squarely into the domain of "house rules."
It certainly seems like a cool variant of that aspect of the blackguard,
but you would need to work with your DM to come up with appropriate
changes to the list of special blackguard features to make them match
the crusader class.

Swordsage Questions

*Q:* When a swordsage (from Tome of Battle) takes a level in the master
of nine prestige class, they can now learn a maneuver from any
discipline. If the same character later gains a new maneuver by taking a
level of swordsage, can it be of any discipline, or can it only be from
the normal swordsage disciplines?
*A:* When a character gains a new maneuver from taking a level in the
master of nine prestige class, that character can choose a maneuver from
any discipline. If that same character later takes a level in swordsage
or any other martial adept class, the character could only choose a
maneuver belonging to a discipline available to that class.

*Q:* The swordsage’s Discipline Focus (from Tome of Battle, pg. 16)
states that you gain the benefits of the Weapon Focus feat for a
specific group of weapons. Does this mean you count as having Weapon
Focus for any feat or prestige class that has it as a prerequisite?
*A:* Discipline Focus gives you the benefits of the Weapon Focus feat,
and would allow a character to qualify for a feat or prestige class as
if he/she had Weapon Focus.

*Q:* How often can you use the swordsage’s Sense Magic ability (from
Tome of Battle, pg. 16) on a particular weapon or armor?
*A:* A swordsage may only use Sense Magic on a particular armor or
weapon once. You can think of this as similar to using a Spellcraft
check to identify a spell that’s already in place, or to identify a
potion. You can try again when you gain your next level.

*Q:* Does the AC bonus of the swordsage (from Tome of Battle) stack with
the AC bonus of the monk, even though they are both based on Wisdom
modifier?
*A:* No. The swordsage’s AC bonus, allowing the swordsage to apply her
Wisdom bonus to her armor class, mimics the ability of the monk’s AC
bonus. Since these abilities share the same name and have the same
effect, they will not stack.

*Q:* Dear Sage,
Does the discipline focus class feature of the swordsage (Tome of Battle
p16) apply just to maneuvers gained from that class?
—Ann Marie
*A:* No.
The benefits of this class feature apply to all maneuvers of the chosen
discipline, regardless of how you acquired the maneuver.

*Q:* Dear Sage,
Can the swordsage (Tome of Battle p16) apply the insightful strike
benefit of his discipline focus class feature to the same discipline twice?
—Ben
*A:* No.
When you gain this benefit a second time at 12th level, you must apply
this to a second, different discipline.

*Q:* Dear Sage,
How often can a swordsage (Tome of Battle p16) use his Sense Magic class
feature on a particular weapon or armor?
—Sammy
*A:* A swordsage may only use Sense Magic on a particular armor or
weapon once.
You can think of this as similar to using a Spellcraft check to identify
a spell that’s already in place, or to identify a potion.
At the DM’s discretion, you can try again after you gain a new level.

*Q:* If you have one level in Swordsage (which grants you Weapon Focus
in the weapons associated with one discipline) and take a level of
Warblade (which grants you the Weapon Aptitude ability), can you use the
latter to switch your Weapon Focus to other weapons outside of the
former's weapon group?
*A:* No. The warblade ability allows you to change “any feat you have
that applies only to a single weapon.” The swordsage ability applies to
several weapons.

*Q:* The Swordsage's chart (ToB p.16) lists skills as "6 + Int modifier
per level, x6 at first level". Should that be "x4 at first level", instead?
*A:* Correct!

*Q:* Alright, so the Swordsage's AC Bonus ability states "Starting at
2nd level, you can add you Wisdom modifier as a bonus to Armor Class, so
long as you wear light armor, are encumbered, and do not use a shield."
Does this mean that you can't use this ability when you are unarmored,
ONLY in light armor? By RAW it does but… is it a mistake for errata,
should I inform my DM that it works with no armor as well?
*A:* The intent is that you get this benefit whether you are wearing
light armor or are unarmored. I will pass this issue along to the
appropriate departments for potential errata treatment. Of course your
DM is allowed to rule however he/she wishes. Thank you for bringing this
to our attention!

*Q:* Do you add any bonus to the swordsage's sense magic class feature?
*A:* Yes, you add your swordsage level to the level check, as usual.

Warblade Questions

*Q:* The warblade’s Weapon Aptitude ability (from Tome of Battle, pg.
22) states that any feat you have that applies to a single weapon can be
applied to any other weapon as long as you spend the 1 hour practicing.
Does this mean if you have Exotic Weapon Proficiency (bastard sword),
you can change it to Exotic Weapon Proficiency (spiked chain) as long as
you spend the required time in weapon practice?
*A:* Weapon Aptitude works on any feat focus on a single weapon, such as
Weapon Focus and Weapon Specialization. Exotic Weapon Proficiency is one
of those feats that works for a single weapon, so a warblade would be
able to use the Weapon Aptitude ability to switch which weapon Exotic
Weapon Proficiency applies to.

*Skills and Feats Questions*

*Q:* If you take the Adaptive Style feat (Tome of Battle, pg. 28), can
you pick new maneuvers and/or ready all maneuvers by spending a full-
round action in the middle of combat?
*A:* Yes, you can use Adaptive Style to pick new maneuvers in the middle
of combat. Since you are picking new maneuvers, they would all be
readied. This is a clear advantage for a class such as the swordsage,
who normally has to spend a full round action to recover a single
maneuver, and would be a great feat to pick up.

*Q:* Let's say you're a level 12 character getting ready to take the
Superior Unarmed Strike feat (ToB). If you take Superior Unarmed Strike,
does having a single monk level amongst those 12 character levels force
Superior Unarmed Strike to give you the UA attack dice of a monk 5, or
do you still get the UA attack dice in the provided table according to
character level?

*A:* You're forced to use the unarmed attack dice of a 5th-level monk.

*Q:* Would you be able to stack the monk bonus and the swordsage bonus
if you altered one or the other via a feat, such as Kung-Fu Genius or
Ascetic Mage?
*A:* Ascetic Mage only allows you to add your Charisma bonus to AC where
you would normally be allowed to apply your Wisdom bonus, and does not
discriminate between the source of the bonus. Kung-Fu Genius, however,
does apply, because it specifically states that it affects your monk
class features, thereby not applying to your swordsage AC bonus.

*Q:* Dear Sage
Can a monk use the Snap Kick feat (Tome of Battle p32) as part of a
flurry of blows?
—Alexander
*A:* Yes. Apply both penalties to all attack rolls made during the
flurry of blows.

*Q:* The Adaptive Style feat in Tome of Battle allows you to change your
readied maneuvers as a full round action rather than spending five
minutes to do so. Does this…
A) Allow a martial adept to regain and change all of their maneuvers
with a single full round action
or
B) Allow them to change the maneuver that is readied in their unexpended
"slots".
A: Adaptive Style will actually let you perform option A) from your
list. So as a full round action, you can choose a new set of readied
maneuvers, and in doing so, reset all of your maneuvers. I hope that
clears things up. Have fun and good gaming!
*A:* Yes, it refreshes all the maneuvers of all your classes. Evasive
Reflexes [feat] - limits on 5' steps taken

*Q:* The Tome of Battle includes a feat named "Evasive Reflexes". This
feat is raising a lot of questions on the message boards. Here are the
main questions that I hope you can shed some light on:
1. If I have both Evasive Reflexes and Combat Reflexes, and I am
normally entitled to four attacks of opportunity per round, what is the
maximum number of 5-foot-steps per round that I can make using Evasive
Reflexes?
2. Do the 5-foot-step(s) that I make using Evasive Reflexes count
against the total number of attacks of opportunity that I can make in a
single round?
Thanks in advance.
*A:*1) 4. You can take a five foot step each time an enemy provokes.
2) Yes they do! Essentially you are replacing the attack with the move,
but it still uses up an attack of opportunity!

*Q:* When the Snap Kick feat mentions "When you make a melee attack with
one or more melee weapons" is unarmed strike considered a "melee weapon"
for the purposes of activating snap kick?
*A:* Yes indeed, unarmed strike would count.

*Q:* When using the Stormguard Warrior combat rhythm ability, is it
possible to score critical hits with the touch attacks (still dealing no
damage however) ? This comes into play when using the Tiger Claw blood
in the water stance which adds to your to hit and damage when you score
a critical.
*A:* Yes, it sure is.

*Q:* Dear Sage
If a character uses the Adaptive Style feat (Tome of Battle p28) after
he has expended some of his readied maneuvers, does he choose new
readied maneuvers equal to the maximum number he can ready, or equal to
the number he hasn’t yet expended?
—Matt
*A:* Using the Adaptive Style feat completely resets the character’s
readied maneuvers, making them all available for use.
If you’re a crusader, you also reset your granted maneuvers.

*Q:* The Clarion Commander tactical feat requires you make a DC 20
intimidate and then make an attack on the next turn. The result is
flanking for all allies for one minute, does this allow a character with
a ranged weapon to flank?
*A:* It just simply states the enemy counts as flanked for you and your
allies, so while you normally wouldn't be able to flank with a bow, it
looks like you can with this feat!

*Q:* The benefit of the Shadow Blade feat as listed on Table 2-1: New
Feats (TOB 30) wildly differs from the benefit as listed in the feat
entry. Which is correct?
*A:* In this case, text trumps tables; the Shadow Blade entry is
correct. (However, the benefit as listed on the table could be a good
feat on its own.)

*Martial Maneuvers and Stances Questions*

General Maneuver Questions

*Q:* Can you know the same maneuvers (from Tome of Battle) more than
once? Can you ready the same maneuver more than once at a time?
*A:* Actually no, you cannot learn the same maneuvers more than once,
nor can you ready the same maneuver more than once at a time.

*Q:* Can a barbarian use maneuvers (from Tome of Battle) while raging?
What about Diamond Mind maneuvers that require a Concentration check to
use? What about to recover maneuvers in the middle of combat?
*A:* According to the text under the Concentration heading on page 39 of
Tome of Battle, the text states “unlike with spells or psionic powers,
you need not concentrate to initiate a maneuver or stance.” Because
initiating a maneuver does not require concentration, you would be able
to perform most maneuvers while in a barbarian’s Rage, or in any other
condition which mimics the restrictions or raging. While raging, a
character would not be able to use any Diamond Mind maneuver that
requires a concentration check. Using a special action to recover an
expended maneuver would fall into the category of “any abilities that
require patience or concentration,” so a character would not be able to
recover maneuvers in this way while raging.

*Q:* When you gain a new maneuver (from Tome of Battle), can you choose
to learn a new stance as it counts as a maneuver for some purposes?
*A:* No, you can only learn stances when your class table states that
you gain a new stance known. (You can also gain new stances by taking
the Martial Stance feat, or taking levels in a prestige class that gives
you a new stance.) You can’t use new Maneuver Known choices to pick stances.

*Q:* When you gain a new maneuver (from Tome of Battle) known from a
prestige class, does it get grouped with maneuvers known from your base
martial adept class, or are they kept separate? What happens if you have
the base martial adept classes and you take a prestige class gives you
more maneuvers known?
*A:* This is actually covered in the rules, though with all the crunchy
bits in the book it’s easy to miss! When you gain additional maneuvers
known from a prestige class, you choose one of the martial adept classes
that you have and add it to the maneuvers known of that class. When a
prestige class gives you the ability to ready one or more maneuver, you
treat this in a similar fashion, choosing one of your base classes that
already has a martial maneuver progression and add the additional
readied maneuver slot to that class. You make these choices each time
you take a level in a prestige class that grants new maneuvers known or
maneuvers readied, so you’re not locked into advancing a specific base
class when you take your first level in these prestige classes. You can
find more information concerning this on page 96 of Tome of Battle.

*Q:* There are a couple maneuvers (from Tome of Battle) that state they
have a save, but no save DC is listed: i.e., Inferno Blast (pg. 55).
What should the save DCs be?
*A:* In general, the save DC for a maneuver is 10 + the maneuver level +
your key ability score modifier (which depends on the discipline).

*Q:* Dear Sage,
Can I use enter a stance or use a boost in the middle of taking another
action? For instance, can I charge up to a foe, enter a stance (Tome of
Battle p43), and then make the attack granted by the charge? Or can I
activate a boost such as burning blade (ToB p52) after I’ve made the
attack roll?
—Taylor & Mike
*A:* No.
As a general rule, you can’t interrupt one of your actions with another
action. The Player’s Handbook provides various exceptions (drawing a
weapon while moving, the Shot on the Run feat, and so on). However, you
can take a swift action any time you would normally be allowed to take a
free action, and you can perform a free action in conjunction with
actions of other types.
You could enter the stance before beginning the charge, or after
resolving the attack(s) granted by the charge, or in between.
Alternatively, you could just move up to the foe, then enter the stance,
and then make the attack, but this wouldn’t be a charge.
You must activate a boost before you begin an attack if you want to
apply it to that attack. Once you’ve rolled, you can’t activate the boost.

*Q:* Dear Sage,
If a martial maneuver states that it allows a save but doesn’t list the
save DC, how do I calculate it?
—Sammy
*A:* If a maneuver doesn’t list a DC, it is equal to 10 + the maneuver’s
level + an ability score modifier based on the discipline:

  * Desert Wind: Wisdom
  * Devoted Spirit: Charisma
  * Diamond Mind: Strength
  * Iron Heart: Strength
  * Setting Sun: Strength
  * Shadow Hand: Wisdom
  * Stone Dragon: Strength
  * Tiger Claw: Strength
  * White Raven: Intelligence

*Q:* Can you switch maneuvers that you know for ones that you don't know?
*A:* Yes. The crusader, swordsage, and warblade can trade one maneuver
known for another at certain levels (see their respective descriptions
in the Tome of Battle). (Prestige classes that grant maneuvers can't
trade maneuvers known.) However, you may only trade one maneuver known
for another at a time.

*Q:* If you are in a stance and initiate a maneuver that both add
additional damage die, such us punishing stance and mountain hammer,
does the additional damage stack?
*A:* Yes, because page 40 of the Tome of Battle says that bonuses do not
stack, and additional damage die aren't considered bonuses.

*Q:* Can a Swordsage or a Warblade ready more than one "copy" of the
same maneuver so that he can use the maneuver more than once per
encounter without having to spend actions to regain his maneuver(s)?
*A:* Unfortunately not. Readying a maneuver isn't like preparing a
spell. You are either Ready to use the maneuver or you aren't! You can't
"Double Ready" a Maneuver! You can only use a given maneuver once per
encounter unless you Recover it during the fight!

*Q:* Another multiclass question. Can a multiclassed martial adept (eg.
Swordsage/Warblade) choose/and or ready the same maneuver for each of
it's classes (provided you have access to the same maneuver)? And if you
gain a maneuver in one class, can you use it as a prerequisite in
gaining a maneuver in the other class?
*A:* No, you can only ever learn/ready a maneuver once. If you gain a
maneuver in one class it can indeed fulfill prerequisites in another class!

*Q:* The "preferred weapons" of each discipline seem to serve very
little function, except for a couple of feats and the Discipline Focus
feature. Can you perform any maneuver with any weapon? Similarly, for
"key skills," it seems like most maneuvers can be performed perfectly
well without the relevant skill. Are these correct?
*A:* Your assumptions are correct. The preferred weapons are just that,
preferred, and there are some feats and other abilities that you can
build around such weapons, but they are not required for using maneuvers
from that discipline. The key skills are the same way. While there are
some maneuvers that use the key skill to determine their effects, this
is not always the case. There are plenty of maneuvers that you do not
need the key skill for at all.

*Q:* Alot of feats and maneuvers in this book refer to weapons, as in
the case of snap-kick (which refers to a melee attack with one or two
melee weapons) and maneuvers, as in the Tiger Claw's 1st level maneuver
wolf fang strike. My confusion arises from the fact that unarmed strike
is referred to as a favored weapon in the description of some of the
schools of combat (Setting sun, tiger claw, shadow Hand). Does that mean
that unarmed strike counts as a weapon when the word weapon is used in
the description of a maneuver? Does it make a difference if the
character has the improved unarmed strike feat? I'd just like to clear
up this confusion.
*A:* Yes your unarmed strike counts as a weapon when the word weapon is
used in the description of the maneuver. Yes it makes a difference if
you have improved unarmed strike feat, as you will provoke if you do not.

*Q:* Just because it isn't really clear in the book: a maneuver that
misses is still expended, correct? You can't "hold the charge" like with
a touch spell?
*A:* You are correct. A maneuver that misses is still expended, unless
of course that particular maneuver states otherwise (currently I don't
believe any maneuvers state otherwise, but if more maneuvers are created
in the future, it is possible they could have additional rules text that
could specify such a thing).

*Q:* And finally, let's say someone is a multiclass swordsage/warblade.
Can a maneuver from Diamond Mind picked from their swordsage maneuvers
forfill the prerequisites for a maneuver from Diamond Mind picked by
their warblade maneuvers? From what I seen, this looks like how it
works, but I figured I'd ask just to be sure.
*A:* Yes Maneuvers taken from one Adept class can fulfill prerequisites
for maneuvers taken in another Adept Class. If you have a diamond mind
maneuver as a sword sage maneuver, and you gain a maneuver as a
warblade, you could Choose Emerald Razor as your Sword Sage Diamond Mind
maneuver would fulfill the Pre-requisite.

*Q:* I have a PC who is a 16th-level Fighter, and I have recently
accrued enough experience points to advance to 17th-level. I would like
to take a level in the new Warblade class from Tome of Battle. This
entitles me to 3 maneuvers known, and 1 stance known. Because my
initiator level is 9, the maximum level of the maneuvers/stances that I
can learn is 5th. My question pertains to fulfilling the pre-requisites
for different maneuvers and stances. Assuming that I stick to a single
discipline when I select my 3 maneuvers known and 1 stance known, Would
it be legal for me to acquire one maneuver that has no pre-requisites, a
second maneuver that has one maneuver as a pre-requisite, a third
maneuver that has two maneuvers as a pre-requisite, and a stance that
has three maneuvers as a pre-requisite? In other words, can I use
maneuvers/stances as pre-requisites for other maneuvers/stances, even
though I am acquiring them all at the same time?
*A:* Yes, you can certainly do this.

*Q:* All of the new base classes from Tome of Battle offer the option of
swapping out an old maneuver to gain a new maneuver at certain levels.
What happens if, as a result of swapping out an old maneuver, I can no
longer meet the pre-requisites for another stance or maneuver that I
currently know? Suppose, for instance, that I currently only have the
following 2 maneuvers/stances from the Iron Heart discipline: A)
Absolute Steel, and B) Disarming Strike. Absolute Steel is a stance that
has one Iron Heart maneuver as a pre-requisite. Disarming Strike
currently fulfills that pre-requisite for me. Suppose I reach 4th level
and decide to swap out Disarming Strike for another maneuver from a
different discipline. I no longer meet the pre-requisites for the
Absolute Steel stance. Am I still allowed to use the Absolute Steel
stance? What if Absolute Steel were a maneuver instead of a stance;
would I be allowed to use it?
*A:* Going with a strict interpretation of the rules, you would only
need to have the appropriate number of maneuvers to meet a prerequisite
when you needed to learn the maneuver, not if you wanted to use that
maneuver later. So the character in question would still be able to use
the Absolute Steel stance even though you have given up your only Iron
Heart maneuver. So again, you only have to meet the prerequisites when
you learn the maneuver or stance, not when you want to use ready or use
it. I hope that clears things up.

*Q:* Dear Sage
Many strikes and maneuvers in Tome of Battle grant a benefit with a
successful attack. If a creature’s damage reduction completely negates
the damage from the attack, does the benefit still accrue?
—Brian

*A:* As it turns out, there are four answers to this question: sort of
yes, yes, yes, and no.

If the maneuver or stance simply adds to the damage dealt by the attack,
add that damage before applying damage reduction (which might in turn
reduce or even negate that extra damage). For example, a character in
the Punishing Stance adds +1d6 to damage rolls with melee attacks. If
you hit a creature with DR 10/— with attack that deals 8 points of
damage and an extra 3 points from Punishing Stance, that creature would
take 1 point of damage.

If the maneuver or stance adds energy damage to the attack (such as
Lightning Throw), damage reduction doesn’t reduce that damage (see
Damage Reduction, DMG pp291-2).

If the maneuver or stance simply requires a hit (or “successful attack”
to apply its effect, that effect occurs even if you don’t deal damage
with the attack that triggers it. Even if your foe’s DR completely
negates the damage from your Leading the Attack strike, your allies
still gain the +4 morale bonus on attack rolls and your Martial Spirit
stance still allows you to heal 2 points of damage.

If the maneuver or stance requires you to deal damage to the target,
damage reduction that completely negates the damage dealt by the attack
prevents the special effect from occurring. This is similar to the
Stunning Fist feat (which only functions against a foe “damaged by your
unarmed attack” or injury-based disease or poison effects.

*Q:* Can you use a wondrous martial item, such as shadow hands, to meet
the prerequisite for a maneuver?
*A:* No, because these maneuvers are temporary bonus maneuvers, and do
not belong to your actual maneuvers known.

*Q:* Can I take 2 rounds to initiate two maneuvers and use them both
during the same round?
*A:* No, each maneuver must be resolved during the round in which you
initiated it, using the action stated in the initiation time.

*Q:* When you swap maneuvers and you only just have the number of
maneuvers and stances to meet the prerequisite for the new maneuver, can
you replace one of that maneuver's discipline's maneuvers or do you have
to replace one from another discipline?
*A:* No, because a maneuver cannot be its own prerequisite. However, if
you learn a maneuver (meeting its prerequisites) and swap out another
maneuver of that maneuver's discipline, you do not lose the use of that
maneuver. Prerequisites only apply to learning maneuvers, not using them.

*Q:* What is meant by being 'in contact with the ground' for the purpose
of the Stone Dragon discipline?
*A:* There is a lot of debate about this subject, but seeing how the
relevant text mentions the 'power of the earth and stone', it is
reasonable to assume that the definition of being 'in contact with the
ground' is standing on earth or stone. This means that standing on
wooden planks (such as when in a building with a wooden floor) or being
airborne prevents a martial adept from initiating Stone Dragon maneuvers.

However, your DM may rule otherwise; the rules are vague on this ruling,
so it is basically anyone's guess what the correct answer is of this
particular question.

*Q:* Do you need to be lawful in order to learn the law bearer maneuver?
*A:* Yes, you need to be lawful in order to learn a maneuver with a
prerequisite of lawful alignment. However, you do not need to be lawful
in order to initiate that maneuver.

General Stance Questions

*Q:* When you use a stance from Jade Phoenix Mage or one of he other
classes that overlays an existing stance, it isn’t clear whether or not
you’re still considered to be using a Stance from that Discipline, or
any discipline.
For example if you have Shadow Blade active with Assassin's Stance and
use Mystic Phoenix Stance over the usual bonus of Assassin’s Stance, is
the stance still considered a Shadow Hand stance for purposes of
receiving the benefit of the Shadow Blade feat?
Any insight?
*A:* Yes you are still considered being in your Assassin's Stance even
though you are getting the benefit of the Mystic Phoenix Stance, in
regards to being in a Shadow Hand Stance for your feat.

*Q:* When can you initiate a maneuver? Can you initiate a maneuver
outside of combat?
*A:* Yes, because there's no mention of maneuvers (and by extension,
stances) only being usable during an encounter.

Specific Maneuver Questions

*Q:* Dear Sage,
Can my swordsage attack while using ring of fire maneuver (Tome of
Battle p55)? What if I have the dervish dance class feature (Complete
Warrior p26)?
—Yuukale
*A:* Almost certainly not.
The ring of fire maneuver requires a full-round action, so the only
other actions you could take in conjunction would be free actions and up
to one swift action.
Thus, making any kind of attack while using the ring of fire maneuver
would be extremely difficult.
The dervish dance also requires a full-round action (because that’s what
a full attack action requires), so you can’t use both simultaneously.

*Q:* Dear Sage,
Does the use of the shield counter maneuver (Tome of Battle p60) incur
penalties for two-weapon fighting? If so, do these apply to the next
round’s attacks as well?
—Alex Boston
*A:* No.
The shield bash allowed by this maneuver suffers a –2 penalty on the
attack roll (as listed in the maneuver description), but no other
penalties for two-weapon fighting apply.

*Q:* Dear Sage,
What exactly can or can’t iron heart surge (Tome of Battle p68) remove?
—Franco
*A:* Instantaneous effects can’t be removed by iron heart surge.
However, any effect with a duration of 1 or more rounds, including
permanent-duration spells or effects, may be removed by iron heart
surge, nor does iron heart surge restore damage, ability burn, or
ability drain. (Because ability burn can't be healed magically or
psionically, it would be safe to assume that it can't be healed through
maneuvers either.)
Iron heart surge doesn’t replace lost levels (though it would remove any
negative levels resulting from a single spell or effect). It would
neutralize a single poison coursing through your system, or a single
disease that afflicted you.

*Q:* Does Leading the Charge and Bolstering Voice affect the User of the
stance/maneuver?
*A:* Considering that a Bard counts as his own ally, and thus gains
benefit from his own Bardic song abilities, I'd say yes.

*Q:* Does the 5-foot step granted by the tactical strike maneuver count
against the limit of one 5-foot step per round? If it does, what happens
when an ally has already taken a 5-foot step in that round before you
initiated the maneuver?
*A:* No, it does not count against it. So if they have already taken
their 5 foot step, they can immediately make another.

*Q:* I see nothing in Tome of Battle that specifies how often (if at
all) you can use maneuvers out of combat… specifically the Shadow Blink/
Jaunt/Stride maneuvers. How often can you use them out of battle?
*A:* According to page 40 of the Tome of Battle: "In the case of a long,
drawn out series of fights, or if an adept is out of combat entirely,
assume that if a character makes no attacks of any kind, initiates no
new maneuvers, and is not targeted by any enemy attacks for 1 full
minute, he can recover all expended maneuvers." Thanks to Warlawk for
pointing this error out.

*Q:* Can the counters that replace Saving Throws with Concentration
Checks (eg. Moment of Perfect Mind) be modified by miscellaneous bonuses
to saving throws (eg. a magic item or feat that provides you with a
bonus to your saving throws)? If not, what happens if there is a penalty
to your saving throw, does it apply to the skill check?
*A:* The Concentration check plus any applicable Concentration skill
check modifiers completely replace the Will save and its modifiers.
Bonuses and penalties to saving throws or even specifically Will saving
throws don't apply.

*Q:* If you use True Strike with the Avalanche of Blades maneuver from
the Tome of Battle, does the +20 benefit the entire maneuver or only the
first attack.
*A:* Only the First Attack roll.

*Q:* I read on the boards that a forum member asked you how Raging/
Dancing Mongoose worked with Time Stand Still, and you replied that you
get the extra attacks per full attack action, so you would get double
the attacks from Raging/Dancing mongoose using Time Stand Still.
Now I looked the maneuvers over in Tome of Battle, and I can't figure
out why that is. The maneuver states that it last until end of turn and
you get some extra attacks per weapon wielded (max of 2 or 4), nowhere
in the maneuver is it said that the extra attacks come per full attack
action. If you read about being hasted, it very specifically says you
get the extra attack as part of a full attack action and therefore you
will get an extra hasted attack from using Time Stand Still. But I can't
see why you would get double bonus from Dancing/Raging Mongoose.
So my question is, why did you rule it that way? Have I overlooked
something or?
*A:* Hmm.. Not sure who answered it that way, but they must have
misunderstood the question! You could initiate Time Stands Still and
Raging Mongoose, and Raging Mongoose would give you four extra attacks
that turn, two with each weapon you wield! But only four. not Eight. You
would be able to choose which full attack action to apply the extra
attacks to during your turn.

*Q:* When using the high level diamond mind maneuver Time stands still,
you can make two full attack actions in a row separate from each other.
Suppose you normally get 5 attacks, three from base attack and two more
from two weapon and improved two weapon fighting. You use Raging
Mongoose to gain two attacks with each weapon at your highest base
attack, this ability lasts for one round. Does Raging mongoose let you
make two extra attacks with each weapon for each full attack action, or
does the limit of two attacks for each weapon apply only for the first
full attack.
*A:* You can make two extra attacks for each full attack action that you
make with this combination. So you would get the extra attacks in the
first full attack action, and get them again in the second full attack
action.

*Q:* When using Time stands still can you use a standard action instead
of a full attack action?
*A:* Time Stands Still specifically allows you to make two full attack
actions, so you would not be able to use standard or move actions.

*Q:* In the Tome of Battle: Book of Nine Swords, the Setting Sun
discipline has many throw maneuvers that follow the rule: "as part of
this maneuver, you must succeed on a melee touch attack against your
foe. Resolve the throw as a trip attempt (PH 158)". Normal tripping can
only be done against foes one size category larger than you. Does this
size limitation apply to Setting Sun throws as well, or could (for
example) a Small sized swordsage use a Mighty Throw on a Large opponent?
*A:* You are still limited in the sizes of creatures you can trip/throw.

*Q:* The maneuver Raging Mongoose allows you to make extra attacks with
a weapon in each hand, but it mentions nothing about taking the standard
two-weapon fighting penalties for doing so.
Are these extra attacks penalized by the normal two-weapon fighting rules?
*A:* You will indeed incur two weapon fighting penalties if you are
wielding two weapons and take your extra attacks with both those weapons!

*Q:* Can Iron Heart Surge remove:
1. Poison.
2. Disease.
3. The spell "Bestow Curse".
4. Ability score damage.
5. Level drain.
6. The influence of an antimagic field. (*)
7. If you use Iron Heart Surge against an effect which does not solely
target you, but also affects an area, do you end the entire effect or do
you just dismiss it from yourself?
*A:*
1. Yes.
2. Yes.
3. Yes.
4. Ability score damage is not an ongoing effect. It is the result of an
attack, spell, or ability. So no - damage, even ability score damage,
will not be removed by Iron Heart Surge.
5. In most cases, level drain is similar to damage when determining if
Iron Heart Surge removes it from the martial adept. If something level
drained you, this is a permanent result, not an effect with an ongoing
duration. You would not be able to use Iron Heart Surge to remove level
drain.
6. Yes, you would be able to end the antimagic field if you chose to do
so with Iron Heart Surge.
7. If the effect does not solely target you, such as the antimagic field
in number 6, it will still end the entire effect.

*Q:* Also I am confused by the Uncanny Dodge-flat foot paradox. I was
under the impression that uncanny dodge allowed one to keep the
dexterity bonus when caught flat footed - not eliminate the actual
condition of being flat footed. I'm looking at the "strike of the broken
shield" power on p. 74-75 and it says, "If your target cannot be caught
flat-footed (he has uncanny dodge, for example)," which is the source of
my confusion. Many of these maneuvers only work vs. flat footed
opponents; must they *also* be denied their dexterity bonus?
*A:* The Strike of the Broken Shield wording is worded improperly
because Uncanny Dodge does not make you immune to being flat-footed. But
the intent should be clear enough. Characters with Uncanny Dodge or
characters that cannot caught flat-footed cannot be made flat-footed by
this maneuver. I will pass this miswording along to the appropriate
departments for potential errata purposes.
In general, follow the flat-footed rules you know when determining the
effects of maneuvers. If a maneuver can be used against a flat-footed
person (rather than having their Dex denied to their AC), a character
with Uncanny Dodge can still be victim to the maneuver.

*Q:* Counter Charge: The victim is moved "2 squares in a direction of
your choice away from you." Is this 2 squares from your location, or 2
squares from where it began the charge? Also, how can it be "away from
you" and also "in a direction of your choice?" "Away from you" is a
direction.
*A:* Again, this is not specifically covered in the text. Simply by
reading, it is 2 squares away from you, which could be any two squares
that do not pass through you. It does not say 2 squares away from the
direction that you came from, only 2 squares away from you. But since it
is not specifically covered in the exact terms that you asking for, it
is going to be up to your DM to determine exactly how this would work.

*Q:* Clever Positioning: Lacks the text that says that this movement is
not subject to attacks of opportunity. Does this mean that it provokes
attacks of opportunity normally?
*A:* While the flavor text of the maneuver uses the word "moving into
his space," the actual rules text of the maneuver never uses the word
"move." The rules text of the maneuver simply states that you "swap
positions with the target." This seems to show that it is not treated as
normal movement and would not provoke. Of course, I see the ambiguity
you're speaking of, so in a case like this, it is again going to be up
to your DM to determine how he/she thinks the ability should work.

*Q:* Five-Shadow Creeping Ice Enervation Strike: I don't understand this
one at all. The box says the duration is 1 minute, but the text says
that the special effects last for 1d6 rounds. Does that mean that the
ability damage only lasts one minute? That's not the way abiltity damage
usually works. Or does the "freezing" effect not kick in for one full
minute after the initial attack? Or does it affect one body part per
round for 1 minute? Or is this simply an error, and one or the other of
those statements is wrong?
*A:* In cases where the stat block and full text of an entry disagree,
the full entry wins out, unless an errata states otherwise. So in this
case, the 1 minute duration is incorrect, and the special effects of
each result only last for 1d6 rounds. The ability damage is treated as
damage is normally treated and lasts until it is healed. For the time
being, just ignore the 1 minute duration, and when the errata file is
created, it should have all the new/correct information.

*Q:* When using the many Setting Sun Maneuvers that require you to make
a trip attempt (Tornado throw, ballista throw e.t.c.) can a character
with the improved trip feat make an extra melee attack if he succeeds on
the trip attempt?
*A:* This depends upon the maneuver. Some of the maneuvers end with your
opponent out of reach, so this wouldn't be possible. I imagine that any
maneuver that ended with your opponent in a threatened square would work
just fine for this purpose. However, without a specific maneuver to
reference it is impossible for me to give a definitive answer.

*Q:* Say I have an attack which does the following damaged on a
successful hit: 2d6 (from weapon + 5 (from Str) + 5 (from Power Attack)
+ 1d6 (Fire) (from the Flaming enhancement) + 10 (extra damage provided
by the Stormguard Warrior Tactical feat). Which damage is multiplied if
I hit my target using the Diamond Nightmare Blade maneuver?
*A:* You will not get the Fire damage dice multiplied, but the integer
modifiers to your damage from Str, Power Attack, and your Tactical Feat
will be, along with your weapons base damage.

*Q:* The Desert Wind maneuver, Firesnake, has a duration of
Instantaneous listed in its stat block. However, the game mechanics text
refers to how far the snake can move in a round and how damage is
handled from round to round. Is Firesnake intended to be instantaneous
(deal damage once and then disappear)? Or is it intended to be an
ongoing effect (deal damage as directed for X number of rounds)? If it
is intended to be an ongoing effect, what should its duration be?
*A:* It seems that the description that allows the snake to move around
round after round is incorrect. the maneuver is instantaneous, in that
you assign a line for the snake to follow, and it does so
instantaneously and is done. Errata has not been put up for this yet,
and until it is, it is up to your DM to adjudicate the effect of this
spell as he or she sees fit.

*Q:* The Level 9 Maneuver for the Stone Dragon Style is listed as
'Mountain Tombstone Strike' (p84). I note that this maneuver (unlike all
the other L9 maneuvers) has no prerequisite maneuvers. Could you confirm
whether this is intentional, or is an omission?
*A:* It is indeed intended as written for the time being. I am passing
it along to the appropriate departments for review regardless. If any
Errata is printed it will be posted to the Errata section of the site!

*Q:* Dear Sage
If I use Mighty Throw (Tome of Battle p73) or another maneuver that
allows me to trip a foe, does the Improved Trip feat grant me an extra
attack against that opponent?
—Gerald
*A:* Yes. The Improved Trip feat applies any time you trip a foe in
melee combat, even if that trip comes from a special power.

*Q:* Dear Sage
Does the Jump check and subsequent jump made as part of the Sudden Leap
boost (Tome of Battle p89) count against the initiator's movement as
described in the Jump skill?
—Gabe
*A:* No. Sudden Leap is its own swift action, not part of a move action,
so the movement is in addition to any you might make using other actions.

*Q:* Dear Sage
Does the Wall of Blades maneuver (Tome of Battle p70) work against touch
attacks? What about touch attacks from spells?
—Dennis
*A:* Yes — this counter works equally well against touch attacks and
normal attacks, regardless of their source.

*Q:* Dear Sage
Can you use White Raven Tactics (Tome of Battle p94) on yourself to gain
another turn right after your current initiative score?
—Robert
*A:* No. White Raven Tactics doesn’t work on the initiator himself.

*Q:* The second level shadow boost Cloak of Deception is a swift action
to activate and lasts until the end of the turn. If a swordsage used
their recovery ability to spend a full round action to recover a
maneuver could they remain still and invisible for as long as they went
first in the following initiatives? If there would be some blinking time
would using this maneuver in this way add a circumstance bonus on
hideing instead?
*A:* The swordsage would remain invisible if he recovered his maneuvers,
because a full-round action takes less time than the end of the turn.
Effectively, it doesn't matter when you take your full-round action; it
never lasts longer than one turn. However, if that swordsage would take
an action of 1 round (such as summoning a monster, for example). This
answer renders the second question moot, but nonetheless, becoming
invisible is almost instantaneous.

*Q:* Can you score a critical hit with insightful strike (TOB 63)?
*A:* Yes, the maneuver states that you don't deal any extra damage that
you would normally deal. Additionally, the examples listed in the
maneuver don't include critical hits.

Specific Stance Questions

*Q:* Dear Sage,
If a single opponent is affected by multiple iron guard glare stances
(Tome of Battle p59), what happens?
—Ken
*A:* Play it just like it’s written, remembering that the penalties
won’t stack (since they’re all from the same effect).
An ogre threatened by two different characters both in the iron guard’s
glare stance would take a –4 penalty to attack any ally of either
character. Assuming the two threatening characters are allies of each
other, the ogre can’t avoid taking a –4 penalty on his attack roll no
matter who he swings at (unless he moves to a place where one or the
other no longer threatens him).

*Q:* Does the shifting defense stance grant you a 5-foot step before the
attack roll is made, making it miss because of your movement, or after
the attack roll is made and consequently results in a failure?
*A:* The shifting defense maneuver grants you a 5-foot step after you
know that the attack misses, because the stance states that it is
activated upon a failed attack.

*Q:* Dance of the Spider: You need one hand free to climb, but do you
need one hand free to remain in place while stuck to a wall?
*A:* The rules don't mention anything anywhere about what you need just
to cling to a wall, so this would again be up to your DM.

*Q:* Giant's Stance: This stance says "to a maximum of Large." But other
similar increases have no such text. Could you then choose to use this
stance to gain the damage as if you were Large, then subsequently apply
an ability (like Improved Natural Attack, Shillelagh, or Powerful Build)
to increase your damage die further?
*A:* The rules are unclear on how this increase would or would not stack
with other things that increase you size. So again, it will be up to
your DM.

*Q:* Island of Blades: Does this apply only against exactly one or two
opponents, or against any number of opponents to which both you and an
ally are adjacent?
*A:* It can apply to any number of opponents. It simply uses 2 opponents
as an example. As long as you and your ally are both adjacent to an
enemy, you get the flanking bonuses.

*Q:* Martial Spirit: This stance lacks the "the foe must pose a threat
to you and your allies" text. A literal reading would therefore say that
you can make any "opponent," even one who poses no threat, like an ant
at a picnic, and gain the benefit of this ability. That can't be right.
*A:* If we take a literal reading of the text, you are correct, we would
have to apply it to any opponent, at any time, even if they pose no
threat to you. Hopefully the DM of your campaign can step in and point
of what is, and isn't, a reasonable opponent for the use of this maneuver.

*Q:* Blood in the Water: How does this interact with an opponent who
aren’t subject to critical hits, but you have a Flaming Burst weapon?
Does that count as a critical hit?
*A:* The ability doesn't specifically state that it doesn't work on
creatures that are immune to critical hit damage, nor is the bonus from
the maneuver treated as critical hit damage, so it looks like this
maneuver would work on a creature that is immune to critical hits.

*Q:* If i'm the island of blades stance and using spiked chain, and an
ally and I are fighting a foe, he is next to him and me only close
enough for him to be threatened does island activate?
*A:* No, you both need to be adjacent to the enemy you want to flank,
not adjacent to each other.

*Prestige Class Questions*

*Q:* How do you determine if a prestige class adds 1/2 per prestige
level to your initiator level (from Tome of Battle), or if it counts
your full prestige class levels for your initiator level?
*A:* A prestige class only adds 1/2 its levels to your initiator level
unless it specifically states otherwise. Currently the bloodclaw master,
deepstone sentinel, eternal blade, jade phoenix mage, master of nine,
ruby knight vindicator and shadow sun ninja are the only prestige
classes that add their full level to a character’s initiator level.

*Q:* The Thunderous Throw (from Tome of Battle, pg. 101) ability states
that you can choose to treat your ranged attack rolls with thrown
weapons as melee attacks for the rest of the turn. Does this mean you
could use feats that would only apply to melee attacks, such as the
Combat Rhythm option of the Stormguard Warrior feat?
*A:* Thunderous Throw allows you to treat your thrown ranged attacks as
melee attacks. Because of this, you would be able to apply any feat that
would normally only apply to melee attacks, which includes feats such as
Stormguard Warrior and the various options that such a feat provides.

Q: The eternal blade's island in time class feature says that you can
use it as an immediate action, but can you use it in the first round of
combat and get to go first no matter what?
A: No. Before you take your first action in an encounter, you are
considered to be flat-footed. The immediate action description in the
glossary says that you cannot take an immediate action while being flat-
footed.

*Q:* Does the uncanny dodge class feature allow you to use the eternal
blade's island in time class feature when flat-footed?
*A:* No. Uncanny dodge allows a character to retain his or her Dexterity
bonus to Armor Class, but is treated as flat-footed for all other
purposes. Flat-footed characters, even if retaining Dexterity bonuses to
AC, can't use immediate (or any other) actions; thus, it's not possible
to activate island in time while flat-footed. The scout's class feature
states that a scout "cannot be caught flat-footed", but refers to the
barbarian class feature of the same name. Therefore, even the scout
cannot use an immediate action while 'flat-footed'. (Effectively,
uncanny dodge merely negates some of the disadvantages of being flat-
footed, but does not negate being flat-footed in and of its own.

*Q:* All three base initiator classes have a mechanism by which they can
replace less powerful lower level maneuvers with higher level ones.
(i.e. in the case of the Swordsage they can replace a maneuver at 4th
level and every two levels thereafter) (Somewhat akin to a Sorcerer's or
a Bard's spellcasting) Yet no provision is similarly given for all the
PrCs. Is this on purpose? Are the PrCs meant to stick with all the lower
level maneuvers, or does the same mechanism apply to them?
*A:* At this point there is not provision for changing your lower level
maneuvers when advancing in a Prestige Class.

*Q:* I noticed "Improved Unarmed Strike" in the prerequisites for the
Master of the Nine Prestige Class and found that unusual as there is
absolutely no Unarmed Combat perks in the class and further, the Martial
Adept classes are all really "weapon-focused".
I suspect that it's in error and perhaps they meant "Weapon Focus" or at
least something more weapon related.
*A:* It is not an error. Not all prerequisites for a prestige class lead
to a class ability based on that prerequisite.

*Q:* 'The full prestige class level,' receives no sort of context. My
question is thus:
Do all prestige classes work toward this goal, or just the ones that
specifically give maneuvers? (Meaning the Bloodstorm Blade wouldn't
contribute.) Furthermore, what exactly is the goal? They increase
initiator level, sure, but it seems to only indicate it does so with the
existence of a martial adept level, which isn't concise with the way
other classes work. So do prestige classes have no effect on your
initiator level without a martial adept level? Or is it that they just
have a greater effect with a martial adept level?
*A:* Only Prestige Classes that state specifically that they count
towards Initiator level do so. This information is given in the specific
Prestige Class descriptions. All other prestige classes that lack this
distinction would be counted at a 1/2 ratio as per the multiclass rules.

*Q:* Furthermore, does initiator level impact your ability to swap out
maneuvers directly? I ask this, because as you might know, sorcerers can
still swap out spells when progressing in a prestige class, based on
their 'hard' arcane caster level (as opposed to 'soft,' which can be
stuff like Practiced Spellcaster or caster level buffs).
*A:* Initiator level does have an impact on how high a level of a
maneuver you can swap for. But it doesn't NOT effect when you would swap
out the maneuver. That is based on class levels only.

*Q:* If you are a multiclassed martial adept (Swordsage/Warblade for
example) and you enter in a Prestige Class (say, the Master of the Nine)
do you add the full prestige class level to one class or both when
determining Initiator Level?
*A:* The Prestige class levels would apply to both. When you initiate a
maneuver for either of your given classes you would add your levels in
that class plus your prestige class levels (So long as that class is one
of those that specifically states it adds to initiator levels) and 1/2
your other Martial Adept class levels.

*Q:* The Eternal Blade PrC has an ability called "Armored Uncanny Dodge"
(ToB p.110). It does not state the benefits instead refering the reader
to the Player's Handbook. It goes on specify that "You can use Uncanny
Dodge or Improved Uncanny Dodge even if you wear medium or heavy armor".
However, uncanny dodge is not restricted by armor worn. Should the
Eternal Blade's actual ability instead be Armored Evasion, since evasion
is also a rogue ability on the page referenced, also has an improved
version that the character could gain if she already had the basic
version, but normally doesn't function if the character is wearing
medium or heavy armor?
*A:* Hmm.. interesting. For now, it reads as written, even with that
redundant bit at the end. I have submitted this to the appropriate
departments for review! Any changes will be posted in the Errata section
as soon as they are made available to the public. I am including a link
below to the Errata section of the site!

*Q:* The Eternal Blade's Island in Time ability (ToB p.110-111) lets a
10th level Eternal Blade take an entire turn as an Immediate action.
Taking an Immediate action normally prevents a character from taking a
Swift action in their following turn. Does the Immediate action of
taking a whole turn use up that turn's Swift action, or, since the
entire turn is an Immediate action, would the Swift action be lost from
the following, normal initiative count turn?
*A:* Yes indeed it does take up a use of a swift action for that turn.

*Q:* When a Shadow Sun Monk from the Tome of Battle book reaches 10th
level, he/she gains access to The Balance of Light and Dark Supernatural
ability that lets him/her bestow one negative level with "each
successful unarmed attack you make".
My question is thus, would an unarmed touch attack qualify for the above
mentioned unarmed attack? Such that a character could make multiple
touch attacks that deal no damage but each inflict a negative level?
(with the caveat of course that each negative level will deal you 1
constitution point worth of damage when the state ends.)
For that matter can maneuvers that require successful melee attacks,
such as Five Shadow creeping ice enervation strike (from the shadow hand
discipline), feral death blow (from the Tiger claw discipline) or the
avalanche of blades (from the diamond mind discipline) be done with
successful melee touch attacks that deal no damage?
Thanks for your kind consideration,
It might seem that avalanche of blades does nothing if done with touch
attacks but try applying the subsequent number of successful touch
attacks to the Combat rhythm ability from storm guard warrior and you
arrive at a very potent combination. I would like also to ask if this is
a possible combination?
*A:* No. An unarmed strike is not a touch attack.
You cannot use melee touch attacks in place of normal melee attacks
unless the ability or maneuver specifically says so.

*Q:* Dear Customer Service,
Recently on the optimization boards, two of our members sent in queries
concerning Tome of Battle and got two seemingly contradictory answers,
which one is the correct one?
*Q:* For the Bloodstorm Blade's Thunderous throw ability, when it says
"you can choose to treat your ranged attack rolls with thrown weapons as
melee attacks for the rest of your turn" does this apply to all aspects
of the ranged attack? I.e. Does the character basically replace all his
ranged attacks with melee attacks with respect to feats (combat rythym
from the stormguard warrior feat, for example, could the touch attacks
for that be made at range with this ability?), damage (do you basically
replace the possible ranged damage with melee damage) and things you can
do with melee attacks (i.e. tripping, disarming and suchlike, without
requiring the ranged disarm or ranged trip feat or ability respectively)?
*A:* If you couldn't normally do these things at range, then you
couldn't now. All this ability does is substitute your Strength bonus
for your Dexterity bonus, and allows you to use feats that affect your
attack bonus for melee attacks and such. Ultimately all this changes is
how you determine your attack bonus. You could use this in conjunction
with Stormguard Warrior's, combat rhythm ability, but keep in mind that
you do no damage when this occurs (until the next round of course).

*Q:* Does Stormguard Warrior's Combat Rhythm damage bonus apply to
ranged attacks made with Thunderous Throw? Furthermore, are damage rolls
when using Thunderous Throw considered melee damage rolls?
*A:* The answer is yes. Since your Ranged attacks are considered Melee
attacks, the damage is Melee damage. With the Combat Rhythm tactical
option these attacks would be Melee touch attacks. Thanks for helping to
sort out this confusion.
*A:* Thunderous Throw does allow you to deal melee damage with your
ranged attacks rather than ranged damage. That is the intent.
Both those answers state that you can use Thunderous Throw and Combat
Rhythm in conjunction with one another. But damage is not dealt when you
first use Combat Rhythm with your Thunderous Throws. The fact that
Combat Rhythm's states that you don't deal damage with the melee attack
trumps the fact that you are dealing melee damage with Thunderous Throw.
The bonus to melee damage on the following round does apply to your
Thunderous Throw damage, however.

*Martial Item Questions*

*Q:* How does the discipline focus weapon special ability work?
*A:* The discipline focus weapon special ability grants a +1 bonus on
attack rolls, which stacks with other enhancements on the weapon. If the
wielder initiates a maneuver or a stance of the discipline to which the
weapon is keyed, this bonus increases to +3. Using the example on page
149 of the Tome of Battle, a +1 Stone Dragon Shadow Hand weapon gains a
+3 bonus on attack rolls (+1 enhancement, +1 Stone Dragon enhancement,
+1 Shadow Hand enhancement). While in a Stone Dragon stance with a
Shadow Hand stance, this bonus increases to +7 (+1 enhancement, +3 Stone
Dragon enhancement, +3 Shadow Hand enhancement). If the wielder were
only using one discipline, the bonus would be +5 (+1 enhancement, +1
from the unused discipline, +3 from the used discipline).

*Q:* Can a weapon with the Aptitude Weapon property be used to execute
special class based abilities that are keyed into a certain type of
weapon? For example, could a Dervish with an Aptitude Light Mace execute
a dervish dance?
*A:* No, you must still actually wield a slashing weapon to initiate a
dervish dance. The aptitude weapon ability only lets you gain benefits
that you would've gained from wielding a weapon you have specific feats
for. So while you might get the benefits of feats like Weapon Focus
(scimitar) and Improved Critical (scimitar), you're not actually
wielding a scimitar, but a light mace in your case.

*Q:* When an item says "for which he meets the prerequisite", I'm
assuming this includes Initiator Level as well as maneuvers known. Is
this correct?
*A:* Yes. So if a martial adept with an initiator level of 5th wears an
item that grants a 3rd-level maneuver, he must still have the
prerequisite number of maneuvers of its discipline, despite having a
high enough level to initiate maneuvers of that maneuver level.

*Q:* Regarding the crown of white ravens, what does "gains knowledge of
that maneuver and can use it" really mean?
*A:* It means that you can initiate that maneuver. For a martial adept
who meets its prerequisites, this means that he or she may effectively
add it to her list of maneuvers known. For someone who doesn't have
martial adept levels, this means that he or she can initiate it once per
encounter, without recovery, as per the Martial Study feat.

*Q:* Can this maneuver you gain knowledge of from the item be changed?
If so, how long does that take? Do you need to remove the crown, then
take another 24 hours to attune?
*A:* You can change the maneuver by removing it and then spending
another 24 hours to attune. The maneuver must still meet all of the
prerequisites of the item that grants it and the initiator must still
meet all of the maneuver's prerequisites.

*Q:* Can you gain knowledge of a stance through a crown of white ravens?
*A:* The item is vague on that issue, but as maneuvers and stances are
mentioned separately in multiple areas of the book, I would rule that
you can't, because the item doesn't specifically mention stances.

*Q:* Can a maneuver known through the crown of white ravens be used as a
prerequisite for learning another maneuver?
*A:* Because abilities and bonuses granted through magic items can be
used to meet prerequisites, you can use the granted maneuver to meet
prerequisites. You would immediately lose the ability to initiate the
maneuver learned through this method if you remove the item, though,
unless you have met the prerequisites in another way in the meanwhile.

*Q:* Can you wear 2 Rings of the Diamond Mind, each granting a different
maneuver?
*A:* Yes, as long as each grants a different maneuver. This is in
accordance to the rule that states that you cannot benefit from the same
effect twice.

*Q:* Can these items be custom-made to fill different slots? For
example, would a Tigerskin Cloak, Headband of the Setting Sun, or Iron
Heart Helm be reasonable?
*A:* Yes, although you should check with your Dungeon Master to see if
he allows it.